
{{Infobox prepared food
| name             = Pain au chocolat
| image            = File:Pain au chocolat Luc Viatour.jpg
| caption          = Pain au chocolat
| image_alt       = Pain au chocolat
| alternate_name   = Chocolatine, Chocolate bread, couque au chocolat
| country          = France
| region           = 
| creator          = 
| course           = 
| type             = Viennoiserie sweet roll
| served           = Hot or Cold
| main_ingredient  = Baker'Yeast-leavened dough, chocolate<ref></ref>
| variations       = Pain aux raisins
| calories         = 
| other            = 
}}

Pain au chocolat (, literally chocolate bread; also known as chocolatine in the south-west part of France and in Canada, is a type of viennoiserie sweet roll consisting of a cuboid-shaped piece of Baker'yeast-leavened laminated dough, similar in texture to a puff pastry, with one or two pieces of dark chocolate in the centre.
Pain au chocolat is made of the same layered doughs as a croissant. Often sold still hot or warm from the oven, they are commonly sold alongside croissants in French bakeries and supermarkets.
In France, the name of the pains au chocolat varies by regions :
*In the Hauts-de-France and in Alsace, the words "petit pain au chocolat" or "petit pain" are used.
*In central France and in Paris, the words "pain au chocolat” are used.
*In South-West France (Nouvelle-Aquitaine, Occitanie) and in Canada, the word "chocolatine" is used.
In Belgium, the words "couque au chocolat" are also used.
They are often sold in packages at supermarkets and convenience stores, or made fresh in pastry shops. 
* In Lebanon, Tunisia, Algeria, Morocco, the Netherlands, Belgium, Norway, Ireland, Denmark and the United Kingdom, they are sold in most bakeries, supermarkets and cafés.
* In Germany, they are sold less frequently than chocolate croissants, but both are referred to as "Schokoladencroissant".
* In the United States and often Canada, they are commonly known as "chocolate croissants" <ref>[http://onefoodguy.blogspot.com/2009/09/tuesdays-tasting-trader-joes-chocolate.html Tuesday's Tasting - Trader Joe's Chocolate Croissants]</ref>.
* In Belgium's Flanders region, they are sold in most bakeries, and referred to as "chocoladekoek" or "chocoladebroodje". 
* In Portugal and Spain, they are sold in bakeries and supermarkets, as napolitanas (i.e., from Naples).
* In Mexico, they are also most commonly found in bakeries and supermarkets, and are known as chocolatines.
* In El Salvador and Brazil, they are referred to "croissant de chocolate".
* In Australia and New Zealand, they are commonly referred to as "chocolate croissants", and are sold freshly baked in most bakeries and supermarkets.
<br />
Origins and history
Legend has it that Marie-Antoinette d'Marie-Antoinette introduced the croissant to France, but croissants and pains au chocolat are a relatively modern invention.<ref></ref> The type of pastry, called "viennoiserie" in French, was introduced in the early 19th century, when August Zang, an Austrian officer, and Ernest Schwarzer, an Austrian aristocrat, founded a Viennese bakery in Paris located at 92, rue de Richelieu.
Originally, croissants and pains au chocolat were made from a brioche base but later evolved to incorporate a buttery flaky dough (pâte feuilletée).
<br />
See also
* List of desserts
References



